# Basic JavaScript-rendered Hello World

## 📝 Your Notes\*

The Document Object Model (DOM) is a programming interface for web documents,
i.e. it represents the page so that programs can change the structure, style,
and content of the document. This document is represented in nodes and object
(object-oriented representation of the web page) and therefore it can be
modified with an scripting programming language such as our beloved JavaScript.

The DOM is built using multiple APIs that work together. E.g.: the HTML DOM API
add support for representing HTML documents to the core DOM, and the SVG API
adds support for representing SVG documents.

### DOM and JavaScript

We **_write_** in JavaScript, but we **_use_** The DOM to access the documents
and its elements. The DOM itself is not a programming language, but witouth it,
the JS language would no have any notion of web pages, HTML documets, SVG
documents, and their component parts. Like said before, we can not access nor
manipulate these documents without an scripting language, like JavaScript.
Although implementations of the DOM can be built for any language.

### Accessing the DOM

It is easy to access the DOM. You can directly use the API directly in
JavaScript from within what is called a **_script_**, which is a programm run by
a browser.

It is recommended not to mix the structure of the page (written in HTML) with
the DOM (written in JS), instead the JS parts are grouped together within the
script tag and separated from the structure. Although we can add HTML elements
with JS in this script, that will be added to the tree for the document.

```html
<html>
  <head>
    <script>
      // run this function when the document is loaded
      window.onload = function () {
        // create a couple of elements in an otherwise empty HTML page
        const heading = document.createElement('h1')
        const heading_text = document.createTextNode('Big Head!')
        heading.appendChild(heading_text)
        document.body.appendChild(heading)
      }
    </script>
  </head>
  <body></body>
</html>
```

\*Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/01.md`

## Background

It doesn't take long to learn how to make "Hello World" appear on the page with
HTML:

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div>Hello World</div>
  </body>
</html>
```

The browser takes this HTML code and generates
[the DOM (the Document Object Model)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_Object_Model/Introduction)
out of it. The browser then exposes the DOM to JavaScript so you can interact
with it to add a layer of interactivity to your web-page.

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <div>Hello World</div>
    <script type="module">
      // your JavaScript here
    </script>
  </body>
</html>
```

👉👉 Years ago, people were generating HTML on the server and then adding
JavaScript on top of that generated HTML for interactivity. However, as
requirements for that interactivity became more challenging, this approach
produced applications that were difficult to maintain and had performance
issues.

👉👉So modern JavaScript frameworks were created to address some of the
challenges by programmatically creating the DOM rather than defining it in
hand-written HTML.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/01.html)
- [Final](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.html)

It's important to have a basic understanding of how to generate and interact
with DOM nodes using JavaScript because it will help you understand how React
works under the hood a little better. So in this exercise we're actually not
going to use React at all. Instead we're going to use JavaScript to create a
`div` DOM node with the text "Hello World" and insert that DOM node into the
document.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 generate the root node

[Production deploy](http://react-fundamentals.netlify.app/isolated/final/01.extra-1.html)

Rather than having the `root` node in the HTML, see if you can create that one
using JavaScript as well.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Fundamentals%20%E2%9A%9B&e=01%3A%20Basic%20JavaScript-rendered%20Hello%20World&em=).
